office at the Austin Redevelopment Authority.
Thomas is the executive director of this
authority, and today is January 8, 1981.
We are interviewing Thomas because of two
reasons. One, he is the immediate past assistant
planning director for the city of Austin, and two,
is the current executive director of the Austin
Redevelopment Authority. The topic of the
interview is the planning process in Austin,
going back as far in history as your personal
experience will enable you to make accurate
statements regarding events that have occurred
that have been important and have influenced the
process and the production of planned documents
in Austin. So with that, Tom, we've got the list of
preliminary questions in front of us. If you'd
like to start with those that you are confident
about and just simply bypass those that we can find
through library research or whatever. Go ahead.
The first issue, I guess, is what my personal
knowledge extends to, and that's to 1975, five
years ago. I have some knowledge, of course, of
what happened prior to that, but personally
involved in watching what's happened. I guess I'd
say that, from my own experience, probably 1972
would be the beginning of accurate statements, if
you would.
When you arrived from Texarkana. Texarkana.
Okay, first legislative authorization,
comprehensive plan. That's easy to check. I don't
remember that. I think it's 1926.
Most recent comprehensive plan approval
occurred in 1977. Prior to that was 1961. 1961
was done by a consultant. What
we weren't sure about was who did the 1961 master
plan. 1961 plan. It's published and so the author
is shown.
It's only been since 1977 as we look at, let's look
at question three. The 1977 plan set forth
policies for periodic review, and that's an
annual review conducted by the Planning
Commission, submitted to the City Council, and
then reviewed, of course, by other commissions
and boards in the city.
Last night, in the 1980 review statement from the
Planning Department's perspective was
presented to the Planning Commission. So under
that plan, there is an annual review and an
analysis of performance, what they did and didn't
do, and how the objectives are being reached or not
being reached. Between the first two plans and
when there wasn't any approved system of review,
what was done to evaluate, let's say, the first
plan? Very little. I'm not aware of any
evaluations that occurred. The land use map was
pretty well adhered to. There wasn't anything
else in there other than some population
projections and things, a typical 701 plan. And
there was criteria in that plan for establishing
industrial districts within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction and things of
that nature that were used. Once in a while there
would be a revision in the master plan, and that
revision generally dealt with that land use
category. of what was an area for low density, high
density housing, what area would be industrial or
non-industrial. More or less minor revisions
rather than entire concepts. Piecemeal.
Exactly. And so 1970, 71 is when they first
determined that that was insufficient and so a new
plan was undertaken. Partially answered the next
question, that is, Austin's comprehensive plans
have been revised before. What was the process
that took place in order to have this revision?
We're speaking about the current one. In 1972, the
city planning department, the planning
commission, and I suspect at that time the council
also, made a decision that they needed a new master
plan. And it first started by the development of a
goals program for what this community wanted
itself to be, known as the Austin Tomorrow Plan
program.
went on for five years, with many, many meetings,
and many, many technical reports, and a
tremendous amount of citizen participation. The
result of all that activity then brought forth a
five-chapter master plan in 1977, which was
adopted by Kelso. But it was a citizen-based,
goals, objectives, policies master plan. We'll
talk about the citizens action later, I imagine.
As far as characterizing the planning style of
Austin, would you say that it conducts
comprehensive planning or one of the other
various styles that cities use from time to time?
The overall development of the master plan, the
1977 master plan, was comprehensive.
That went as far as goals and objectives and
policies. And those were, as I said,
comprehensive community-wide. The big issues,
growth, development, style, shape of the city.
Moving beyond that to specifics then, the city has
done incremental planning. It has selected areas
of the community, the Lake Austin area, and looked
at that in a microcosm. It has looked at corridors,
it has looked at creek, areas. And so one at a time
they've been reviewed. And there's two of them
under review right now. The plans are being
developed. So it's been incremental in the sense
of looking at different areas that are of a smaller
scale rather than responding to different
problems in that as they come along. It's usually
incremental as far as area goes, different city
areas. As far as the master plan itself is
concerned, that's true. As far as the issues and
conflicts that occur, those are case by case.
When was the first zoning ordinance in Austin? I
believe it was 1926.
And that was done approximately at the same time as
the legislative, as the city's comprehensive
plan was approved then? Or shortly thereafter? I
believe that's true. I don't have the documents
anymore, but There was a master plan done in the
1924-25 area.
As far as administrative procedures and planning
program elements, how does Austin, what does
Austin use for implementing the community plan
and different master plans that it's had
throughout the broad area? Yeah, first of all of
course it uses, it uses zoning. It uses
subdivision control and
to a great deal that uses its capital improvements
program in selecting investment based upon the
master plan and its provisions. There's been
violations of that consistently in the past three
years. But the master plan was intended to guide
the CIP process. And in fact, the charter requires
a provision that no CIP can ever be funded and no
project undertaken which is in conflict with the
city's master plan. Have there been any
precedents where conflicts, project conflicts
with the master plan and it has been brought to
court then? No, they've not been to court. What has
happened is that the master plan has been amended
to remove the conflict.
Then of course on the other side, projects have
been dropped too. How has the organizational
structure of the Austin Planning Department
evolved and the planning process evolved over the
years? Well, my experience, as I said, is
relatively recent, maybe 1972. I don't know the
arrangement. The charter provides that there be a
planning director and a planning department and
sets forth the basic responsibilities of that
department. It's organized as a line department
of the city of Austin. It's independent of public
works, engineering, and all the others. The
department head reports directly to the
assistant city manager, and then ultimately on to
the deputy city manager and the city manager
himself. Its organization includes processing
of subdivision flats and zoning, and then the
development of long-range plans and special
studies.
What type of liaison is there between the Planning
Department and the legislative body that it lends
advice to that is, I imagine, Austin City Council?
Well, the Planning Department is charged with
support and staffing of the Planning Commission
and the Historic Landmarks Commission. the
actions taken by those two groups whom the
planning department supports directly then goes
to the city council the planning department
represents those boards as well as its own
opinions before the council but it does directly
support those two commissions and then there's an
ongoing goals committee group of citizens that is
somewhat dormant today that meets periodically
and the planning department provides some staff
to them their purpose quite appropriately, at
least in the 77 concept, is they're the watchdogs
of the plan. Their charge is to review and keep
track of what's going on in the city and make
comments as to its applicability to the master
plan. You mentioned earlier that citizen groups
and action groups have played a great role in
adoption of Austin's plan 2000, where one of the
last master plans that have been adopted. Would
you say they played a valuable role as far as input
went? Did they have direct access to people in the
planning department? Yes. Yes. In fact, prior to
the Austin Tomorrow Program, citizen
participation, I'm told, was independent groups
and individuals who would state their cases to the
Planning Commission and try to prevail when their
issues were deemed to be important. With the
coming of the Tomorrow Program, these were
formalized and the city began to formally
recognize neighborhood groups and chart
territory under which they would be consulted and
actually become a neighborhood activist and
there's some 65 of those that have occurred and
been chartered, if you will, recognized by the
city since the Tomorrow Plan began. That went
further now that any time a zoning change occurs or
anything, the cognizant neighborhood group that
is recognized by the city is given special notices
to allow them to come and participate in those
activities. Are those citizens groups rather
structured and active? Or it would depend on which
of the 65 groups I imagine you were dealing with.
Some would have more of an active interest and some
would be more passive. That's true. There are
neighborhood groups that are not very active. The
city requires for recognition that they have a set
of bylaws, a membership, that they show that they
are representative of the neighborhood they
claim to represent. There is. Beyond that group,
there is an Austin Neighborhoods Council made up
of presidents or chairmen of each of these
neighborhood groups. who bring a unified voice
then to face the city council or others when an
overall city issue is involved. Because on one
level the individual is worried about his
district, but through the neighborhood's
council they are then able to deal with the overall
city issues like capital improvements programs,
utility policies, and things that affect
everyone. I would imagine from the type of
association that that is, that is on a
neighborhood level, that there can be quite a bit
as far as special interest goes to a neighborhood
and it would be hard for any one of the presidents to
have any kind of community-wide interest. Has
this been a problem as far as citizen input goes?
The Neighborhoods Council has been most active in
providing a forum and additional support for an
issue that faces one or two neighborhoods. As an
example, a certain particular zoning or
transportation proposal may impact negatively
one neighborhood but be beneficial to three or
four others. They provide a forum among
themselves to come up with either rational
compromises or present a unified front. They do
and are expected to be very suspicious and very
serving of the neighborhood they're in. But
neighborhood issues such as CIP and where we have
elections and that. They act as a sounding board
and a compromise group to come up with an overall
plan. They've been effective in that. They've
also provided a training ground for people who
seek council or commission appointments because
they get to know the issues from their
perspective. Now the neighborhood groups have
been characteristically antagonistic of
business. because they represent the
residential sector of the community and not the
business sector of the community. Even those that
are in leadership positions in citizen groups are
typically amateurs when it comes to planning.
They have an idea of what their interests might be.
They may even have an interest in what Austin's,
may even have some good input on what Austin's
future ought to be. But in the case where
professional planners can see that their input is
for their own benefit and short-sighted, for one
example. Is that overridden by people in the
planning department or is it still taken into
account when the advice is formulated? Well,
Austin may again be unique in some respects
because many of the people who are in leadership
positions in the neighborhood groups do carry
professional planning credentials. They have
the education, experience, and many are employed
in professional planning organizations.
When they present an issue or wish to testify on a
particular zoning case, subdivision, or
whatever, their comments are their own. They do
not gain particular credibility with the city
staff because the staff has its own position that
it must, and it does, project The Planning
Commission then reviews, and here's testimony
from many people, they independently make their
position, the city staff makes its own, and
there's no filtering of that. There may be
conflict, and that has happened in many cases
where the staff has felt for other good reasons
that that was an inappropriate decision or
inappropriate position. They'll so state in
theirs. The neighborhood group makes its counter
proposal and then the Planning Commission and
Council make a decision. That's been
characteristic of Austin.
Cities in Texas have each had their own unique
history in Austin, especially since it's been the
capital of the state. And there are several events
that can be followed as far as to draw some kind of
comparison between cities in Texas. And several
events will have played different roles as far as,
and the role of planning within those events can be
significant. Austin was founded in what year?
1839. And that was, was it originally planned or
plotted out? It was plotted out under the Republic
of Texas to be the capital of the state. There was no
town in existence when it occurred. Was it a state
body then that did the original platting or was it
done by a consultant or an individual? It was done
by a surveyor hired by, I believe, Sam Houston. But
at that time, Texas was a republic, an independent
nation. And the charge from the history of this
community was that they had chosen the site
central to the entire state and decided that the
city would be here and then the
the elected groups to the Republic. The President
of the Republic then selected the surveyor who
laid out the original city, which was a mile
square, which we're sitting in right now. I
imagine other cities in Texas that were already
established at the time and already might have had
claims to be the capital had some there was some
conflict as far as creating a new city that was to
serve as the capital republic. Is that true? Well,
in 1839, I believe the largest city in Texas was San
Antonio.
At that point in time, there were few cities,
obviously. It was a totally frontier state.
Having just gone through the 1836 Alamo, the fight
for independence from Mexico. It was a frontier
state. So, there was to be a capital, there was not
to be a fight from existing cities. And so the
agreement was that there should be a capital
central to the state, accessible to all of its
citizens, that did not put one city against
another. And I believe the records indicate that
it was the general consensus that a new city be
formed and that it be done. And of course after
looking at many sites around the state, this was
the site that was chosen. Have there been any
significant city or county or state fairs or
exhibitions held in Austin where planning has had
a significant role?
I'm not aware of any. Austin has always been the
capital, but I'm not aware of any particular of
centennials or anything that occurred here. I'm
sure there was a centennial in 1939, but I'm not
aware of what it was. How about major conventions?
Has Austin been a site? Austin has not been a site of
major conventions. It has, because of its size,
has not been able to attract, primarily because it
has a lack of hotel facilities. It has adequate
more than adequate transportation access, but
the Chamber of Commerce has repeatedly told us
that the lack of hotels, and of course there's no
convention facility to hold a large convention in
Austin. People have gone to San Antonio and Dallas
before. Is that an element that is addressed in the
master plan? Is that something that's desired as a
goal? to grow to the size where that kind of
operation could be feasible and conventions
could be attracted. There have been several
elections in this city to propose the
construction of a modern, large convention
facility to take advantage of this location and of
course the state capital itself. There has been
expressed a great deal of support for having major
conventions in Austin if the facilities were
available. In 1972, I believe, is the year in which
an election was placed before the voters to build a
convention facility, and it was defeated. There
has been continual discussion since that time. It
has been widely discussed throughout all the
business and residential communities. But to
this date, there has not been a successful vote to
do that. You mentioned earlier that Austin did not
exist, and it was selected as a site for the
Capitol. Can you tell me what other functions in
those frontier days Austin served other than
being the capital let's say for commerce, trade,
or transportation or that? Well, when it was
chartered as a city, Austin didn't serve any
economic function. It was a governmental seat,
pure and simple. It was a stage line. between San
Antonio and North Texas and on up to St. Louis and
that area. There were instances of some fringes of
the cattle drives from South Texas, but not very
many, because the cattle trail was east of, it was
east of Austin, from the South Plains up through
Amarillo, Abilene, east and west. I was thinking
west. Yeah, some east, some west. The Fort Worth
Railhead of course was east coming out of the Cape
Ranch area. Then the very far south and west Texas
groups through Abilene and on up into Kansas and
Omaha and places like that. But to my knowledge
until the coming of the railroad there was no great
economic activity here. It was a water supply
sufficient to support a community and it was
centrally located in the state. What impact did
the coming of the railroad have on Austin? And what
relationship did it have to other Texas cities as a
railroad hub? Well, the railroad killed cities in
Texas by bypassing some. It made others by making
them new places for commerce. For Austin, as I can
see it, it never had a tremendous economic benefit
because we weren't a railhead. We were not a great
agricultural area either. It provided another
means of transportation to and from the state
capital to conduct the state business. That's
about the extent that I would know. Was there any
increase in state business as a result of the
coming railroad or expansion of state government
in relation to that? Well, as the state grew, I
think the railway The railroad was one indication
of the growth of the state and the importance of the
state capital, and it may have been a solution to
the symptom that was already occurring as the
state was growing. As you look around, of course,
since 1886, the new state capital, which was built
after the original one burned, There's been
continual expansion of state government, and it
has been a, up until today anyway, the state of
Texas has chosen to centralize its offices in
Austin, unlike other states who put its major
offices in many different cities. Texas has not
yet done that. They have discussed it. I don't know
if they're planning to do it, but to date, all of the
headquarters of all of the state agencies are all
right here.
Texas, Austin has always been dependent upon the
state as an employer. Let's talk briefly about the
federal government, specifically military
influences in Austin. Can you tell me if the World
Wars have had a significant impact on planning in
Austin due to, let's say, new military bases and
influx of population resulting, or housing? I
don't think they have, though. Prior to World War
II, the only significant military establishment
was Camp Mabry, which is the home of the Texas
National Guard. And it has not had a tremendous
influx of anything. It was a reservation set aside
for that many, many, many, many years ago. World
War II, the Bergstrom Air Force Base was created
outside the city, at a pretty good distance from
the city. We've only now grown to encompass it.
There has been housing that has resulted as that
base has come up and gone down, and some of South
Austin reflects that. But if you say major today in
relation to 500,000 people living in the area,
there is no dominance of military installations.
So even in the case of the latter Air Force Base,
planning conducted by Austin City did not need to
consider the consequences of military
population? coming into the area? It does not
appear that they have because we have the state
highway system serves that facility. That was
outside the domain of the city. The development of
residential areas in proximity to that Air Force
base have resulted in severe noise impacts which
indicates that there was a somewhat of an
ignorance of the effect of that base on what it
would do in residential land. And right now we have
significant noise impacts and problems in the
East Austin area as a result of the operation of
military jets.
During the 1930s, during the Great Depression,
New Deal financing as a result of New Deal programs
had a great impact on Texas cities. Can you tell me
what impact, from what you know, WPA and funding
for planning and development had on Austin during
that time? I don't know about any planning and
development that occurred. The city hall was
built during that era. It is a WPA project. The
federal courthouse is another.
I'm not aware of too many other specifics. We do not
have any flood control districts that I'm aware of
like San Antonio River that was a WPA project. I'm
not sure what the system for the dams of the
Highland Lakes was about.
Something that you're well versed in and probably
address is the impact of urban renewal in Austin
and what role the city has played as far as having
people write grants and use available federal
funding as a resource for stimulating local
development. Could you say something about that?
Austin was extremely active in the urban renewal
programs. It had five urban renewal, very
significant urban renewal projects. Today there
are two of which have not yet totally been
completed. It was a major development activity
that led to the expansion of the Capitol Complex.
It was a major development activity that led to the
expansion of the University of Texas. It was a
major development activity that led to the
beautification and saving of Waller Creek. And
then in East Austin, There are three areas in which
it had a tremendous impact on the removal of slums
and blight and replatting in the typical sense.
But there are some unique factors in the Austin
Urban Renewal Program that are not generally
known even by Austinites. Among those, the LBJ
Library is located on urban renewal land. The
expansion of the university, the Super Drum,
Brackenridge Hospital, all of those lands were
made available through the use of the urban
renewal power, which is very, very significant.
It has recently come to light that there have been
problems with accountability of funding that
Austin has received from the federal government.
What do you see as the prospect for urban renewal
and federal funding in Austin City? As a result of
that, how has planning been affected by the
problems that Austin has had recently? Well, the
Urban Renewal Program, of course, expired in
1974, so the possibility of a rebirth of urban
renewal is remote unless new federal legislation
is prepared. Funding problems today result in the
Community Development Program. The lack of
funding currently, it's not been a long period,
four or five months without funding, have
resulted in the impairment of rehabilitation
programs to assist neighborhoods in keeping
those neighborhoods viable living
environments. They've had some effect on
planning, but not very much. The planning
function in the city of Austin has been
self-sufficient and supported by the city itself
and has never really depended heavily on federal
funds for its operation. As far as projects that
planners have envisioned for Austin that have
been affected by this? What kind of
accommodations are being made to adjust goals and
timeframes?
Well, you're talking about the cut off the funds or
the... There don't appear to be any
adjustments to be made, really. The majority of
the funds that have been cut off affect housing
rehabilitation, which is an ongoing, forever
problem. There have not been, because of the
restrictive use of the funds, any great new
community-wide type projects that were planned
using these funds. So it's not had an effect on
those. The funds are restricted in their use
anyway. There has been ongoing planning,
continues to be, for I think the convention
center. There's been discussions of a new city
hall. There's ongoing development on Town Lake.
All of that's privately and publicly supported,
apart from any federal funding. But there is a
significant impact when you consider that five or
six months of rehabilitation activity has had to
stop, and that affects hundreds of families.